Good morning.
Good morning. I saw you waving patiently outside for while.
Yes, we knew as long as you were in the
care, we were probably safe.
Good. Good to have you back here.
Um, for the committee, thank you
for making yourself available.
We have you here for an hour, so, uh, I'll pass it to you
for opening comments and then we'll open it up to me
because Got it.
Oh, Kiara. Um, and I'll keep my
opening comments very short.
I have read the instructions
and I know that we've seen you a couple
of times this year anyways, so you're familiar with us.
But, um, uh, as you know, I'm Ray Lamb, I'm chair
of the Health Quality and Safety Commission.
Um, I'm delighted to have
with me today Professor Sunny Collins,
who's our new Chief executive since August.
Um, Sonny has taken over from Dr.
Peter Janssen, who had
to leave us in February due to ill health.
Um, as I said, I'm not gonna spend a lot
of time explaining what we do.
You've heard from us a couple of times this year already,
but I would like to note a couple of things
and also highlight a couple of things
'cause we're pretty proud of some of the work
that's represented in our annual report this year.
Um, a key function of ours, of course, is leading
and coordinating work across the sector to monitor
and improve the quality and safety of services.
Uh, we've got a legislative mandate as a voice for consumers
and we hold significant expertise with data information
and use that to understand what's happening in the
system and how to improve it.
What we see and say is informed not just by system data,
but also from patients themselves.
And we think that's pretty important.
Um, and when we see issues, we act quickly to escalate these
'cause of course, we're a couple of steps
removed from the front line.
We can't necessarily do it ourselves.
As with many organizations,
we've undergone significant change in recent years to ensure
that we can deliver in our priorities within our resourcing.
Healthcare. Acquired harm can
and does have serious consequences.
Oh yeah. So avoiding these harms, of course, leads
to longer, healthier lives
and also reduced costs
through avoiding unnecessary remedial work.
We believe our role is more important than ever given the
change, current challenges and changes across the system.
But as I said before, we can't do it alone.
We have to work really closely with other agencies
to lead and influence change.
And we're constantly trying to be better at showing not just
what we do, but what we achieve.
And this committee gave us a good reminder of the need to do
that last time we saw you.
So please be assured that we are working on it.
Um, we really want to demonstrate what we do, um,
how it makes a difference, uh, to the health system
for those who work in it,
and also most particularly those who use the system.
Hopefully you can see that in this year's annual report.
It's always difficult, um,
when your work is a few steps removed from the front line
to actually demonstrate the impact
that you have when there's a few other players between
what we do and, and what happens out there, um, to,
it's hard, difficult to clearly identify sometimes
what has been achieved for the end users,
which is the consumers, um, patients themselves.
We are very proud of our latest annual report
and the work it represents from the last year,
as you will have seen it notes many achievements.
Uh, and I just wanna highlight a couple, uh,
including hearing from over 200,000 people
through our patient experience surveys.
So these help to highlight what's working well
and what the challenges are, and they inform the insights
and the information that we provide to decision makers
and service providers they can lead to
and allow us to monitor better patient experiences.
And we think that, you know, some
of this work over the last 10 years, for instance, has lead
to the fact that we now have consistently significantly
higher rates of people saying
that they feel involved in decisions around their care
and discussions around their care.
The production and dissemination of insights, reports,
alerts, data intelligence,
and other information on the quality
and safety about health services enables early
identification and escalation of issues and risks.
And it supports evidence-based responses.
So an example of that is the work that we are doing
with Health New Zealand and a CC to try
and address the ongoing issues
with pressure injuries outside of hospital.
Mm-hmm. A new atlas of healthcare variation domain on COPD.
So that's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease highlights
both regional and demographic differences in prevalence,
hospitalization and medication use.
The reason I mention it, the reason it's important
and the ATLAS itself is important is that we have data
that shows that clinicians respond to what's in that atlas
around the variation that we see
and they change their practice.
So when we updated the ATLAS recently, we found,
for instance, that 40,000 more diabetes patients are
receiving appropriate medication than five years ago,
and potentially preventable hospitalizations have dropped
15%, uh, in mortality review.
Um, there's been a fair bit of change
and a lot of work going on.
One of the things I wanted to highlight is
that we've increased the level and of analysis
and improved the institutional positioning
of perioperative mortality in particular.
So two, two tools
that we developed are helping Health New Zealand
to identify changes in surgical mortality outcomes.
And we've assisted Health New Zealand
to set up a group within their national
clinical governance group to look at any variance
and to take necessary actions to address it.
And that's a pretty important initiative.
It's actually seeing some action being done much more, um,
immediately within the organization itself to address some
of the things that have been highlighted.
Finally, I'd like
to highlight the framework for clinical governance.
We developed, it's now being used across the sector
to strengthen accountability
and improve patient care and experience.
And again, we've been working
and continue to work closely with Health,
health New Zealand on that
and also to ensure that their model
for clinical governance in the regions is aligned with it.
The new early warning system
for aged residential care we've,
we've delivered is enabling faster identification
and treatment of acutely unwell aged care residents.
It's the first of its kind internationally,
so we are pretty proud of it.
Um, and there's very high interest across the whole aged
care sector, residential aged care sector,
enrolling it out, implementing it.
We're working on digital tools
and other things to help them with that.
And finally, we've also, with others,
made significant progress
and trauma care via the National Trauma Care Trauma Program,
including improved detection of brain injuries
through consistent use of post-traumatic and assessments.
So, um, those are just a few
of the things I wanted to highlight.
As I said, we, we know that it's a work in progress.
We're trying to get better at demonstrating our
impact, what we achieve.
Uh, we're pretty pleased with this year's annual report.
We think it shows a good year and we welcome your questions.
Excellent. Thank you. We have two questions.
Uh, Andrew, then Asha and then Ricardo.
Thank you. I may, Mr.
Chair just a primary and, and three or four subs.
Um, thank you for all you do.
The questions I'm going to ask you are, are going to go
to a number of organizations
'cause we've got claims from the mental health minister in
particular that we are seeing increased treatment access,
increased training, more community workers,
more frontline workers that people have got somewhere to go.
I'm wanting to know why there isn't a national mental health
safety dashboard.
And the 300 indicators
that you have provided in your report.
Um, as you know, our work in terms of the, um,
mental health and addiction quality improvement, um,
program has been taken back into Health New Zealand.
So our main window into what's happening in the mental
health area is through the requirement now to always report
and review seclusion.
Um, and then through our more general work.
But I could, I'll ask Richard Hamlin
'cause he'll be a bit more aware of what,
of any work's been done in terms of your dashboard.
Actual dashboard question
if you introduce yourself, Richard.
So I'm Richard Hamlin, director
of Health Quality Intelligence at the commission.
Um, so we've not, uh, really
advanced a mental health dashboard ourselves largely
'cause others were doing it and, um,
particularly the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Commission, uh, did a lot
of work about their own assessment frameworks
and, um, there are other things we can do, uh, that we have
to do and we were happy to let them take the lead on that.
Uh, there are things that are emerging though, one
of which is a collaboration, uh, with, uh, the commission
around a, uh, patient experience survey for those
who are in, uh, mental health, uh,
or have experienced mental health services.
We also have, uh, produced data from the primary care
survey, uh, which we put
inside an atlas showing mental health, um, the experience
of mental health care, uh, amongst that cohort patients.
So we have done things, but we've, uh,
allowed the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Commission, which has primacy to take the lead
Here. Thank you. And
in your, um, leader of expectation
or statement of intent, it says that you must
and report in on areas of increased risk.
We have seen from, uh, crisis performance
and it's been deteriorating.
There's abandoned calls, longer waits,
Maori over representation, police cells,
crisis assessments and so on.
Why have you never issued a quality alert on
crisis service safety?
Do we, do we get that data?
It's not data we don't actually have access to.
So our alerts tend to be those that we,
um, automatically have.
Why don't you get access to it?
I mean, when I read the paperwork, it looks like there is a,
an umbrella, uh, requirement
and mental health seems
to be completely missing from the data that you are
providing insights into.
I wouldn't say completely missing, but it's certainly less
of a priority, largely
because of the existence of the,
the Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission.
But it's a, it's a fair challenge to raise.
Um, we've also got the same
regarding Ed Mental health harm in, in, in ed Wait Times
and emergency departments.
Have you done any, um, analysis into that?
Uh, not specifically on mental health,
but on ed Wait, times more generally?
We've done some work which we have shared with.
And finally, Sorry.
So just, just following on that, that line of question
and, um, a lot of the answers do seem to be
that it's the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Commission is leading this.
H how, how do you two work together, earn something?
Well, a good example would actually be the,
the specific thing we're doing now on, um, um,
a patient experience survey, uh, for mental health, um, uh,
for mental health patients or
for mental health code people use mental health services.
Uh, there, it's a matter of early engagement
with them about the design, uh, involving them in our, uh,
design processes, sharing the data.
We provide them with data to support, uh, their, uh,
annual reports and so forth.
So there's a flow of communication between us, uh,
and we're, we are, you know,
we can work together. We do. Mm-hmm.
So just, I, I can just add at
that we also meet at a leadership level too,
quite regularly, um, with the chair of the board
and also, um, the chief executive.
And I might say just a slight declaration here, both Sunny
and I, I've just recently been appointed
to the mental health commission board,
so both Sunny and I are on that board.
So there are opportunities for greater
cohesion across the two.
You've got one more? One more.
So what, what do You see is, um, what do you see
as your kind of responsibility in this partnership?
Uh, to support, to provide, uh, support
where our expertise is there
and to work with them where they have expertise
that we can use and things that are very clearly our
responsibility, like the patient experience, um, program.
So we would also see, um, some, I think mental health at,
at the sharp end through the SAC one
and SAC two adverse event reporting as well.
So we, I guess we see we're going
to see increasingly patient experience,
which we can bring into the mix working with the commission.
And at the other end we see the adverse event reporting,
which obviously we work straight back
through Health New Zealand providers on in
particular. Ingrid.
Thank you. You did mention seclusion, um,
and there's a le level of granularity in some
of your other markers such as falls, infections
and medication harm.
But when it comes to seclusion, we don't see anything
around inpatient sec exclusion, inpatient restraint,
bed occupancy pressure, overcrowding risk,
or, uh, sentinel events in acute mental health units.
So why are you not including that level, uh,
of detail in your mental health, uh,
national safety marker program?
Well, this was, uh, designed
with the system about the things
that were most useful to them.
Uh, I'm not actually sure there's a huge amount more detail
than we'd give in, um,
the mental health seclusion than you would find in our other
quality and safety markers.
Those were very much designed, uh, with one outcome measure
and a series of process measures.
Um, for the mental health, uh, seclusion program,
the process measures were quite disparate as,
'cause people were doing different things in different
places to get things down.
And there was a, a single measure
or a di a a diverse way of reporting a single measure
as an outcome, which is pretty common to what we would do.
Given everything you've said
and where you say the accountabilities lie,
would it be a fair assessment to say that your picture
of the mental health system based on the data
or lack of data that you have
and the lack of analysis is probably, uh, very thin
and that, that this lies elsewhere?
I, I think we see part of it,
and I think it, it comes back to, in fact,
how we work with a lot of things.
We, we, we are one of, we get different pieces
of information in different parts of the system
and it's about being able to kind of
do well at putting it together.
But I think you're right, we do see parts of it.
We don't see the completeness.
Um, and I think there is opportunity to do more in
that area, particularly working
more closely with the mental health
Commission. Not, not many parts
though compared to other
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And, um, noting that
we've had many opportunities to talk.
I just wanna go a bit deeper into some
of the areas in the annual report.
Thanks. I'd like to ask you some questions about figure two
please, which, um,
looks like a really interesting effort to try
and quantify the, um, value of your, of your work.
Um, can can you please explain how these,
um, uh, savings are calculated?
And what I'm trying to understand is,
is this a real readout on what's happening now
or an estimate projecting benefits based on the evidence
about the interventions that you use?
I'm gonna ask Richard, because he's much better than I'm
in explaining things like, and how, how we come
to these calculations.
Okay. So there's two, there's two elements here.
Um, the first is the avoided cost of harm.
The second is the, uh, value of avoided disability.
Just life here is lost. You're comfortable with the concept.
So, um, on the avoided cost of harm,
when we started any of these programs designed to, uh,
change people's be oh, change behavior in the system so
that you've got better outcomes.
And there was always a clear evidential link between them.
We also looked for the best evidence we could find on the,
an estimate of cost.
Uh, so this is all from the peer review literature.
We will take an estimate of cost.
We have applied that, uh, throughout.
We have not adjusted for inflation.
The way that we use this is we, uh, the way
that we have measured our outcomes is we take the
specific outcome harm.
We measured it over a baseline period prior
to the introduction of the program, uh,
classic quality improvement style.
We then monitored what happened to that outcome
as we saw the change in, in, um, process.
Um, once we had seen a statistically significant reduction,
uh, um, measured by statistical process control methods, uh,
we then reset to a new level of, um, current harm.
The difference between those two was used to estimate
or to calculate actually a, uh,
a reduction in harm based on
what would've occurred had the same
initial level of harm being
Applied patients. Okay. You get the prize
for the
best answer at annual review.
Thank you. So the, I mean, that's great
and it's good to see any effort to calculate the Yeah.
Uh, from a small number of your programs.
The, um, the, uh, benefit, uh,
our party is very interested in the opportunities
to prevent more harm in the health system because of this.
You know, not only do people get out of hospital well,
but there's also these, uh, um, opportunities to save money
and bed nights, um, through that you've outlined here.
Uh, what are the other opportunities to do this
that you currently don't have programs on?
If I might suggest, one
of the most interesting ones to me is pressure injury.
Um, which has increased particularly, uh,
both in and outside of hospital, particularly in the years,
uh, following, uh, the COVID uh, experience.
Um, what is quite interesting is about 10 years ago,
some early work, uh, was undertaken between ourselves a, c,
C, um, the then district health boards
and others around what would be necessary to, um, address
what the issue then, because I mean,
obviously occur and bad things when they do.
Um, my sense is this is a much more complex one to address.
'cause there's a lot more going on, uh,
in some ways actually rather like the, the seclusion.
Um, and it needs more people to come
to the, the party to do things.
I mean, what's actually quite interesting about most
of the ones we report here, there was pretty clear cause
and effect I think with some
of these other ones, pressure injuries.
It's more there. But it does seem to me
what we are seeing there is a definite opportunity.
It's also been a persistent problem.
So we are seeing it again and again in each set of data
that comes through that it's not kind of shifting.
That's correct, isn't it, Richard?
Yeah. And in fact, in fact, it's, it, it, as I say,
it had worsened and it is stuck it
and kind of new normal level, probably 20
to 30% higher than it was prior.
The other area that we've seen,
and this is highlighted through some existing programs,
but has come up more recently
and certainly, um, uh, struck us, um, at, in terms of some
of the insights reporting is,
and bearing in mind the aging population is the, um,
care pathways is the, the difficulties that are arising,
which you can't just put down to the fact
that there are more older people
and increasingly more older people,
but where, you know, older people are sort
of more older people are spending longer in hospital
and there aren't those kind of step down.
There's not that continuity that we need
to be really thinking about between primary care, hospital
aged care, you know, other community supports.
Just two more, Mr. Chair.
Um, what are the types of, um, solutions
that might be able to be implemented
for the pressure sore area?
And I, what I'm trying to pressure injury, you put it, uh,
um, is this a matter, um,
of simple checklists like you use in some
of these other areas?
Or is this about staffing in a, in a
and resourcing of aged care?
It's more complex than that, isn't it?
Uh, uh, yes, yes to both.
And, you know, there's, you know, there are, uh, easy access
to appropriate mattresses, for example,
would be a another example.
Um, there is probably something about home care as well,
not just age residential care
and sort of, uh, uh, those sorts of things.
There's probably something around, um,
I was gonna say health literacy, you know, sort of.
So I mean, it feels
to me this is a very most multifactorial approach. My
0.15.
Wonderful. Um, we've thank you
for those comments about pressure injuries.
Just interested, if any, um, uh, other officials want
to broaden out that comment to other areas
where there might be opportunities over
and above pressure injuries.
We shouldn't let the opportunity to do good be passed up.
Did you want to say in terms
of mortality review, DERs there,
I mean we, one of the things with mortality review is,
you know, we have to prioritize and do what we can.
Um, but if we had the opportunity, where would we see it
In terms of wiping it?
Uh, Don Matheson's my name.
I'm the director of mortality reviews and thanks.
Uh, oh, there's, there's huge opportunities
and mortality reviews.
There's between eight
and 10,000 preventable deaths every year.
Uh, probably the tricky thing for us though is which, which
of those does our role in health quality
and safety can make a difference?
Um, uh,
and of course there's lots of other parts
of the sector also focused on reducing those voidable deaths
from a CC
and, um, uh, uh,
uh, MSD.
And yeah, I mean there's a broad number of factors in it.
Where we are focused currently is looking at, uh, as, um,
Ray said, perioperative mortality, sweetie
maternal mortality, uh, perinatal and maternal mortality.
And avoidable mortality with regard
to cardiovascular disease, um, particularly
regarding treatment for cardiovascular disease.
Dr. Dr. Mathson, could you just repeat those?
I got perioperative mortality, cardiovascular, sude,
Perinatal maternal, yeah, sorry,
peri perinatal and maternity.
Yeah,
Perinatal and maternal. Thank
You. Mm-hmm.
And one thing, oh, sorry.
And, And, um,
one intervention that I recall from previous maternal
and perinatal mortality review reports is improved access to
maternal ultrasound.
I mean, in terms of a single intervention
that we're not doing that could be done,
that would save some of these, um, avoidable, prevent some
of these avoidable deaths.
Do you think that's significant, um,
and uh, a helpful intervention?
Or are there others you prioritize ahead of that?
Uh, well, from what, from previous reports, we see it
as a very helpful intervention, particularly if it
reaches those, um, uh, those, uh, with the greatest need.
Um, so it's, uh, just two elements to it is,
is their access,
but then making sure that the people
with the greatest need actually get access.
One of the reasons for the shift
that we've been making in the mortality review space,
I know we've talked about this with you before,
but is actually designed to try
and shift the needle to get some
of these recommendations implemented.
And so that's why we're quite excited
about the perioperative stuff.
'cause it's actually, I mean,
it sounds like it's just another group,
but it's within Health New Zealand we're involved,
there's a bunch of very senior relevant clinicians
who are actually looking at what's happening
with the mortality figures there.
And we're hoping, you know, we can get some bit more real
time action when we see things and identify them.
And how, how would you Oh, sorry.
I was just going to say with regard to ultrasound, the,
uh, the story over the mechanism was that the, um,
mortality review Committee made it as a recommendation.
Subsequent from that, the National Quality Forum took it up.
It took maternity and maternal health up
as a issue of focus.
Uh, and so, um, yeah, that, so that was sort
of engaging the other sector director in it.
Excellent. Thank, thank you. Um, another area of kind
of doing, doing no harm
or preventing preventing preventable harm is, um, hospital,
uh, or healthcare associated infections.
Mm-hmm. Um, so what sort of programs have you been doing?
What success have you had in that area? Um,
Well ask Martin to come and join me,
but my, we've had quite a significant program with various,
you know, the, is the hospital acquired infections,
hand washing, you know, hygiene and those kind of things.
That program of work was one of the ones
that got shifted back to, um, health New Zealand in June.
Um, but we have had some quite significant
success with it over time.
Martin is our expert in this area,
So Martin Thomas, clinical director.
Um, uh, yeah, as Ray alluded to the, the, um,
infection prevention control program transition this year
back to Health New Zealand.
Um, I assume Meryl mentioned about,
um, uh, other opportunities.
And one of the things that we were looking to work on,
if the program had remained with us, was
around peripheral iv, um, infections, um,
and stuff, risk factor emus, which is, uh, a growing issue.
So that would've would've been one
of the other areas that we looked at.
Um, healthcare associated infections, um,
particularly postoperative infections.
There is an opportunity to expand the work that we did in
that, um, field,
but we did it to take a, um,
a point prevalence survey a number of years ago,
which identified potential opportunities
to expand the healthcare associated infections, um, program.
Uh, most of the healthcare effect associated infections
are usually associated with, um, with implants,
so peripheral IVs, ary tract, uh, sorry, ary catheters.
So it's looking at, um, areas where you can produce packets
and bundles of care to reduce those infections.
And we've had success previously with, um, joints, uh, so
introducing, um, uh, programs through joint,
joint joint reduced joint infections, um,
which was very successful. Um, so
Yeah, just looking to expand those, those
Areas really, It's not,
I mean it's not directly related,
but it's probably relevant to mention
that we have done quite a bit of work
and continue to do in the sepsis area.
And, um, I was really pleased actually.
It's good on a board. You often a little bit removed from
what's going on, but I was at a function recently in a
senior clinician or senior manager from Southern Cross
Healthcare came up to me
and said, thank you so much for those tools
and for those resources for our staff.
You know, they're really helping in terms
of early identification and treatment of sepsis.
So it's the kind of stuff we produce and people use.
Thank you. Okay, thank you.
Just looking at, um, the sections around, um,
enabling the workforce purpose in the survey
and leading health quality intelligence, um,
looking forward in terms of the survey that you've produced,
how are you looking at incorporating, um,
the patient's experience when it comes to staffing levels,
say staffing levels more broadly
and being able to also try to quantify
that in the service that you do?
Some of that feedback, um, informs our insights reports
that go up to the minister.
So, um, ev everything
that we do is informed from those patient surveys.
So any opportunities we get through our work
to provide information to decision makers, um,
and to frontline services, uh,
that it informs that it comes.
And so what comes from the patients is used in that as well.
And so, particularly, you know, some
of those insights reports do contain information around, uh,
staffing levels and people's experience that there's a lot
of, um, we get a lot of feedback, particularly around access
to services from people
Because across the health system we heard from nurses,
alled, health doctors, et cetera,
around concerns from safe staffing levels,
from the insights we have produced so far.
What story does that tell you when it comes to, um,
patients being able to access the health system
where there are safe staffing levels?
The story that we get from patients is that they still,
um, and I'm looking at Richard,
he can correct me if I get it wrong,
but we still, um, hear from patients
that they're waiting too long, but once they get into the
system, we still consistently hear
that people receive an amazing standard of care.
And, you know, with whatever's happening in terms
of the pressures and challenges of staffing, it's clear
that the staff themselves go, you know, above
and beyond to ensure that people by
and large get a very good experience.
And finally, so in terms of the, um, programs you've done
to improve the competency of workers when it comes
to patient safety, which looks really, really good,
do you think though that, um, there's concerns that the,
if the efficacy of those programs maybe hindered by the fact
that we are seeing in some wards
and in some, um, space in the health system, um,
staff not being replaced when they leave and
therefore having less staff being able to carry out the work
that you're training them and equipping them to do?
I I mean we just, we keep delivering the
programs and they're still available.
So I mean, people will come through as they, as they join up
or as they, uh, come on board,
people will undertake the training
where it's available. I'm not quite sure.
So we have heard that, for example,
a staff lead in some areas of the health system,
they are not being currently replaced.
If you have less, uh, staff being able
to deliver the same amount of work in a shift, for example,
um, do you not think that no matter
how much training you give them, things will fall one way
or the other, um,
and go wayward as a result of lack of safe staffing levels?
It's a bit, it's a bit outside our,
our remit in terms of safe staffing levels.
I mean, what we see, if we see issues arising,
whatever the cause relating to quality
and safety, they'll come through the various avenues, um,
including the adverse event reporting.
And then I would, we would expect
that the subsequent investigations by Health New Zealand
or whoever the provider is,
would then highlight whatever might have
contributed to that event.
And if staffing's an issue, then that would be
where it would be picked up.
Thank you. Okay. We've got a few questions.
We've got Cam, Jenny, I loss Asha,
Thank you. This far,
this is, uh, this is far from my area, um,
but I'm asking about some of these, uh, work plan
reporting tables that are in the manual report.
Uh, do you feel that the targets
that are being fully achieved
and delivered on are specific enough
or, uh, you know, I'm, I'm reading them
and it's coordinate the scoping phases with the,
with the wider health sector to develop a strategy
that defines the patient safety?
I mean, there's not, do you think
that's quantifiable enough?
This is the, what we struggle with, as I said to you,
you know, when you're not directly, you know, like
what we do and then the outcome, there's a whole lot
of stuff that happens in between.
Um, and so it's an ongoing challenge
and you know, I've been on the board for a few years now.
Every, uh, we are constantly grappling with
how we can get better and clearer about how we measure
what we do and how we report on it.
And we don't just support what
we've done, but what we've achieved.
So we've got a really good opportunity coming up
because our statement of intent, um, is due for renewal,
including these measures
and the way in which our reporting, um,
the reporting measures that we use.
Um, and so we are meeting in February to talk about
what our new strategic priorities are, what, um,
it looks like and to, and
what we are kind of, how we're gonna measure it.
And we will be continuing to try agree with you that,
you know, they're really hard to kind of get here
around sometimes and so we want to get clearer
and we're working towards that,
but noting the difficulties when you're a few steps
back from Sure. What happens.
Okay, well that's probably enough. Does that
Answer your question? Yeah,
That's good answer. Yeah.
Okay, good. Um, thank you.
Just going back to mental health, um,
you have a mandate which includes highlighting emergence,
uh, emerging risks across services.
We know that mental health is in crisis,
particularly for youth work.
There's a survey out currently by the mental health, um, uh,
group in Auckland.
We see increasing, uh, crisis need, um,
worsening in equities and so on.
And we've seen, and,
and we've had in this committee reference, uh, to a leader
to minister ju from the health
and safety Disability commissioner in relation
to the tragic suicide of a 13-year-old.
I've looked at a number of coroner's reports
and um, the mental health commission itself has identified
the lack of safety guards and rails
and tracking of data with the 1 7, 3 7
and other telehealth services.
Why are you not monitoring that?
And what would it take for your organization to formally
identify these telehealth performance, um,
services as a safety issue,
Data gathering?
Is that, yeah, I don't
Think we got detail much.
No. Yeah, I mean, I think, I mean, Ingrid, you know,
I think there, there is an issue about avoiding duplication
across the two commissions.
And so it would be a matter of needing to really clearly
think about, um, what's, what is the bit
that we can really add value to where we're not duplicating
responsibilities or work being done by the commission,
and then should we do it or should they do it?
So I think, I think you're highlighting,
highlighting an opportunity to do more.
Um, uh,
but I think that's about as much as I can say at this stage.
I, it sounds like from Richard,
we don't actually have the necessarily data apart from if it
pops up in other channels like mortality
review or you know,
those sorts of things. Patient experiences,
Because we know commission, it's very much dependent on
where they see a public interest or a need.
Mm. Is this something
that you will talk about in February when you talk about
your strategic plan and the missing data
and perhaps oversight for some of these other? We'll,
'cause you put it on my radar.
Thank you. And I mean, just getting back
to ASHA's question earlier,
the other thing I really did want to highlight
that we've thinking about a lot is the commission in its um,
10 years or whatever so far has been very hospital focused
and we are acutely aware of the need
to do more in the primary care space.
And so I think you'll see going forward
from February and the changes there.
So I, and that, I mean I've actually,
we've made it a stretch KPI for Sunny that we want
to do more in that primary care
and community area part as well.
Supplementary, Mr.
Chair supplementary, um, I understand
that sounds like a work in progress,
but could you expand on the type of, um,
measures you might make?
Well, we are looking, um, we are looking,
we are doing some work already, aren't we in primary care
around, um, quality measures?
Yes. So we have, um, been working with GP NZ
around their quality dashboard about deriving.
And I think, um, A lot of the approaches we've taken
for the, um, for the Atlas, which are quite, um,
you know, disease specific
or patient group specific
is actually quite a nice way into this.
'cause you actually think about the whole pathway
of a patient's experience of how a patient is treated.
A lot of the data which have not been available are what's
happens inside the GP surgery and that sort of interaction.
What we can get a bit at the drugs a little bit less on the
testing and so forth.
So one of the things, what we are looking to work with
with them is how can we bring together
what we have from this sort of Atlas type measures
to the sorts of measures
that they can derive from GP systems.
And then can we, uh, put these in more intelligent, uh, sort
of pathway sets of indicators
and then actually then look at the variation we have done.
Actually a good example of this way back in the past was
around um, anti-microbial resistance
and sort of, uh, antibiotic prescribing.
And we actually did a, a small, um, sort
of nudge type experiment, uh, where we wrote to all gps
of this is where you sit on the distribution, this is
where you sit from Marty and Pacific as well.
'cause often that was under prescription
rather over prescription.
And we did see just simply sending the letters in a,
an appropriate sort of way actually led to a change in, in,
uh, antimicrobial practice.
So there are things that we could do in those sort
of spaces which are, could, could, um, pick up on that sort
of flow of, uh, appropriate treatment.
We're also, I'm getting more granular
with the patient experience surveys, uh,
and people's experience of primary care
and feeding that back very directly to the practices
Supplementary.
Can you see a world where, um, I'll exit my GP clinic
and um, provide satisfaction feedback
and that's, um, available to others to see.
Well, we already have the patient experience survey
for primary care, uh, which
Is in, in terms of um, uh,
understanding patient satisfaction at a particular clinic so
that others can, can see that. Oh,
Alright. So, so that's
publication, publication at yeah. GP level.
Um, I can see some real problems at that level
of granularity and potential perverse effects.
Um, I mean there's 30 years worth of evidence on
what is the effect that, you know, how do people respond
to quality ratings of, of,
of services And it's not necessarily in a consumeristic way.
And there are some quite interesting, um, shall we say,
some interesting unexpected effects.
And there are some interesting dogs that don't bark in,
in the, in the literature.
What you do tend to see is
that organizations respond rather than consumers.
Um, I'm happy to share, um, that, that
I'd love to say that. Thank you.
We have a primary from Jenny Mark.
Ah, thank you. Just, um, you,
at previous times we've been in, you've been
to, uh, speak to the committee.
We've talked about surgical mesh, um,
and some recommendations that you had made
and just really, um, getting the opportunity now to,
to give us a catch up on where, where
It's at. I'm gonna bring Martin
up 'cause Martin is actually our
representative in, in this work.
So he's up to date with the latest where it's at.
Are you able to update the committee now? Yes.
Martin Thomas, clinical director again.
So could you just push that slightly further? I know, um,
Away or closer? Closer, closer.
She was having trouble before, so.
Okay. Um,
so there were four recommendations that were made
For the lifting of the pulse on
Surgical mesh. Um,
the, uh, they were synap of
regional mul, um, multidisciplinary team meetings
and they have been established within each of the regions.
Um, there was the establishment of the registry, which, um,
I believe the contractor has just been signed with Monash.
Um, and that is in the process of being rolled out.
And we facilitated that last year in helping that, uh, uh,
to get the registry across the line.
Um, it was establishment of the credentialing, um, which is,
um, has occurred, um, development of, uh, patient related
or patient, um, resources, uh, to, to, um,
enhance informed consent.
And those have been, uh, those have been completed
and we, we completed those, uh, maybe six months ago.
So currently it's the rollout of the registry, which is due
to happen over the next several months.
Uh, which would then, um, cause the, the review
of the pause lifted to be reviewed
Supplementary, um, one Do No, that's fine.
Fine.
Uh, on the credentialing, um,
how widespread is credentialing
and are we at a stage where every potential, um,
surgeon is credentialed?
Uh, no. There have been four rounds of credentialing.
Um, there is currently a review of the credentialing process
that will be led through Health New Zealand
and the credentialing framework,
which is the standard against which surgeons are
credentialed due to be reviewed in the
next three or four months.
Um, uh, there, there are people
that are still awaiting credentialed
that haven't been credentialed for a number of reasons.
Partly one I think is
because of the, um, the requirement
to set up new credentialing panels
and a new credential process in the new year.
And, um, some of the surgeons have, have, um,
have not applied
because of the found the process onerous
is what we've been reported about. Yeah,
We're well aware surgeons don't like this print thing,
but there is a safety issue here.
So have, uh, you foreshadow that the pores may be lifted,
would it be lifted in a situation
where every surgeon performing the surgery would have
to be credentialed or would they get the opportunity
to continue to operate without being credentialed?
No, they Would assume operating,
They would, they would require be
credentialed against that standard.
Okay. And this review of the framework,
that's not watering down the credentialing standard, is it?
Uh, no, the, the terms of reference have yet
to be drawn up, but, uh, from my perspective, uh, no,
we will not look to be watering that down.
There is some discussion as
to whether it should be credentialing just a mesh.
Um, uh, we are arguing that it should be credentialing
that cuts the whole of pelvic floor procedures
And the health and disability commission is
in there with us on that too. Isn
Well we have conversations with HDC regularly about that.
Thank you. So
Still a work in progress really,
that it is and it's very slow.
Yeah. Yes. How so how far, if you, if we were
to give it a sort of a number percentage wise, how far
through the, the process is it in terms of
achieving the recommendations
that we've set? So we have sort of a clear
Picture. The, the four
recommendations were left in the pause.
Um, I would probably say 80 to 90% there.
And that's a discussion around lifting the pause.
There's still a decision to be made. One more?
Yes, fine question. That's fine. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Is this a new primary? Yes.
Alright, we'll have to wait. So
Great, Carlos. Thank
you Mr. Chair. My question is on the annual home
and committee support service experience.
Yes. Um, obviously it was launched last year in 2024.
Can you highlight to the committee
what concern have you find in this?
Yes, I'll ask Richard to come up
'cause he handles these surveys.
Um, and I would have
to, um, consult my notes on the things that were in there.
My by from, sorry, we do a lot of these, the, the of memory.
There were some concerns, uh, around
time spent, uh, uh, with the, the client.
Uh, but I would have to sort
of revisit the, uh, the paperwork on that. We,
We could get you that information if you like. So
Let, let me remind you,
your report actually highlight the issues is communication,
scheduling appointments,
and also, um, the service provider doesn't take seriously,
um, regarding the complaints by the, by their clients.
So I would, I would want to see, I mean,
obviously you make this survey, you get the findings and
We feed It back. What action?
Yes. So what action have you given
to the service provider and do you have any follow ups?
Well, we, we, we undertake this on a,
um, on an annual basis.
We have, all of these are reported
to the service providers in detail.
They have, um, both the data
and, uh, underpinning reports to show the issues, uh,
for them, uh, which have comparative data.
We don't have a regulatory role in the HCHS sector.
So our, our role here is one of providing information
And encouraging them to do something about it.
So from my saying, as as part of your job is go
to give advice and recommendation to the ministry,
have you give that advice and or what advice
or recommendation have you given
to the ministry to conceal them?
Um, I would have
to check exactly what's been done on the spot. Mm-hmm.
But we do update, I mean, it's a general term.
We can come back to you with more specifics,
but anything like that goes as, as part
of our regular reporting to the ministry
through our quarterly monitoring that they do of us
and what we're doing in terms of feedback we're seeing,
You know, that's very important.
We get the, the findings, oh, sorry, chair.
Um, you know, I think it's very important to find the, uh,
to get the findings and follow up with the issues,
not just do the survey for the sake of doing it. Mm-hmm.
That Would you like us to come back
with more specifics about that? That would be great. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank chair.
Thank you. Aisha, you're up next.
And then Ingrid, then Jenny.
Um, just wanted to start by saying like,
I thought that in your report had a good balance of, um,
describing your activity across the, um, focus areas
that you are working on.
So I picked maternity, um,
and wanted to go to your website to try
and find information on, um, what the
measures or reports actually show.
And I'm, um, I can't get very far with that.
And I wondered if you could tell me, um, how it is
that a member of the public would find
that safety information or quality information
or maternity services in a, in a way that gave them
a lay person an understanding of what the issues are.
Oh, well we would, we would hope it's through the website,
but from the feedback that you've given us,
it's not as easy as it could be. Sunny, did you want to
Address that? Yeah, if I can
just expand on that.
So, um, we recognize that the website needs
considerable work to be useful to members of the public,
and that's work we're currently undertaking.
So some of you're probably aware
that website design is actually a really, uh, complex thing.
Um, and websites have multiple audiences who are looking
for information for multiple purposes.
And so there's always a balance to be struck.
But we do recognize that's a piece of work, um,
currently ongoing.
We recognize that the issue with it.
Yeah. Thank you. And I do note it is some
of the data on the website is called an atlas,
like it's clearly there for quite a high level of detail,
but at our last hearing we had quite a bit of back
and forth about, um, The change away
from writing particular reports on maternity.
And, um, your team outlined
that the information would be on the website
and my concern, um, how do you address the concern that,
uh, reports are packaged for the public
and now we've got a, the information is on the website.
Um, the last I can find in the maternity
LMC registration data is from 2018,
but how, how do we, how do we
have this in a digestible format for the public so
that there can be some understanding of
what these quality issues are?
Um, absent having proper
detailed written reports regularly issued,
I think, I mean we're, as sunny indicated, it's an non,
it's a work in progress.
Um, but we are looking at lots of different ways
to get the information out.
So, um, the, if you look at the, for instance, um,
the surgical mortality information that we've put out,
we've done that, the team's done quite a good, uh,
job with an infographic.
Now, you know, you do need backup stuff to provide,
as we noted at the board, a lot of context around how
to understand it and read it.
But, you know, looking at things like infographics at, um,
at visuals, at other, you know, ways of kind of, you know,
putting things into bite sizes
and, you know, as, as Sunny has said,
there are different audiences.
And so we need to think about, you know,
the public's need perhaps a little differently from perhaps
what providers might need, but,
and make sure we accommodate both.
Do you think it's as accountable?
Um, you know, this, uh, um, system of having the,
uh, information either in a very,
very detailed website
because those reports drove questions from journalists
and inquiries and um, pressure to improve things.
And uh, there will be some,
it hasn't been a proper maternity report
for two years now. There
Will still be, I mean you're talking specifically about
maternity, there will still be reports
in some for some things.
Um, you know, I know for instance
with there's a report coming around, uh, disability, uh,
that's gonna be really good that, uh, in the new year with,
um, Don did you want to talk about what we're doing
with the maternity information?
We are actually releasing,
we're currently analyzing the 2022 data,
as I understand if you're talking about mortality review,
and that's gonna be, there's gonna be information released,
um, in the new year in 2026.
Uh, yes. Um, uh, can I add one more
to the list I gave you before, which was family violence,
which is, uh, yeah, yeah.
Um, in terms of mortality review, uh,
for maternal mortality, we last reported in
that in the middle of last year, uh, in the 16th report.
Um, as we speak, we're currently
again reviewing maternal deaths.
There's a number of years delay, well not delay,
but until the necessary information is about.
So we'll be re this year we're reviewing
2022 maternal deaths.
Uh, and to answer your question, what we are heading for is,
as Ray said, is a public facing, uh,
information, but also other layers of information
that those in the sector might be interested in.
And that's what we've, um,
developed in the perioperative space where there's, uh, a
explorer type tool so people in the sector can see
where the deaths are occurring
and where the variation is occurring and take action.
And so that's what we want to do
or, uh, across different areas of mortality
to have these different, uh, different layers
for the different audiences.
So it's not, uh, to move away from detailed reporting,
but to have that reporting more, um, more up to date, um,
uh, uh,
and also, um, more accessible, uh, particularly for,
for the, for the people who can act to address the issues.
And that's why, uh, in, uh,
perioperative we've, uh,
helped establish within Health New Zealand a mechanism
so that actions taken, the difficulty we had previously
was the reports were very well received by the sector, uh,
and journalists, as you indicated.
However, the impact in terms of reducing
mortality was modest in many cases.
So we are looking at how do we work in the system
to have greater impact as, uh,
and that means doing things a bit differently.
So that segues really nicely into the June, uh,
report into femicide, which you have referenced.
And femicide is of course, intentional killing of women.
And we can see from your report that in a five year period,
uh, 25 more Maori women than non
Maori women have been killed.
So that's quite specific and important data in the sexual
and family violence space.
Um, you talk about recommendations
and I guess it's even more difficult when you've got
multiple agencies involved.
So I note that you don't have markers, um, that
the, that there are no sort of, um, ways of ensuring
that aftercare recommendations are taken up.
That there are system change monitoring,
um, things available.
There are obviously data gaps, including
equity gaps relating to specific ethnicities.
And I go back to again, your core statement
of performance expectation,
where you have a very strong emphasis on measuring equity
and yet we don't see, uh, public equity measures
for mental health safety or quality.
So my question really is, um,
how effective is that report going
to be in reducing our horrendous sexual on family violence
statistics and why?
The focus on something that goes deep and is important, uh,
but covers multiple agencies when we still have this paucity
of focus on mental health indicators generally,
which include three T obligations in which are not present
in your, in your reporting
In terms of impact. It
goes back to that challenge around, you know,
that was a very good report.
It got a lot of public attention
and it certainly, you know, if you're measuring it in terms
of raising awareness of the issue,
it certainly gets a few ticks there.
But it goes back to the problem that we're grappling with
and with all of the mortality review
and indeed all of our reports we have, we, you know,
there's very good data, very good information,
pretty good recommendations.
We could probably do fewer
and we're trying to get better at that.
Uh, and then it's the bit about
how do we make something actually happen.
And that's why we, we are so, um,
so much highlighting what's happening
with the perioperative stuff.
'cause to actually get in
and then within that case have a, a actual working group
of people who are taking responsibility, accountability
for making some changes to what's been identified
is the way we need to go.
So it's around, with all of these things, trying
to find bit ways to, um,
however we package it, whether it's a report, whether it's,
um, through infographics, whether it's a,
a whole suite of things.
It's about then finding ways to get
that engagement and to make some change.
'cause ultimately it's the change we want, whatever it is.
And, and you know, we are saying it's a challenge,
but we're, we are working on it and so,
and something, there are some signs
of progress in some areas, but not all.
Yeah. And thank, thank you for answer.
You talked about aged care
before in Australia we saw that there was a separate agency
that held governments to account on
how they implemented Royal Commission, uh, recommendations,
which, uh, uh, holds the gravitas
and credibility of the Royal Commission
for an organization like yours.
Do you have enough legislative teeth, um,
or, uh, levers to be able to get the outcomes
that should be coming from these really good reports in the
recommendations that you given?
If in a blue sky world, what would be different so
that we can see some change because we're getting report
after report, particularly in sexual family violence,
the stats get worse.
If anything,
I think that we, um, I mean that's a decision that's kind
of outside of us as to what you want the functions of the,
of the health quality and safety Commission to be.
You know, that's actually, that's
a government decision of course.
Um, in terms of the levers that we currently have, um, it's,
it is around, um, influencing, leading, you know, punching
above our weight as a small entity.
Uh, and ultimately being able to make recommendations to,
you know, give reports to the minister to
agencies like the Ministry of Health
and, um, health New Zealand.
If, if there was a desire to give us more teeth than that,
then I think that's a political decision
Just to stop on that. Yes.
Um, thank you for that. Yeah.
And noting that the Latin American community has been really
welcoming the report you made, um, around this, um,
and we've received feedback on it,
are you doing a subsequent report to track
the recommendations
that you've outlined on the report on fem side and,
and if not, um, how will the public, um, get that level
of accountability over the recommendations you've made
and the list, um,
but have actually been implemented by government?
Yes. A follow up plan?
Yes. So, uh, for that report we're working with the center
for the, um, family Violence
and sexual Violence prevention,
which is the multi-agency grouping.
Um, because the actions that need to be taken
go across government, uh, uh,
and we've discussed some of them including, uh, support
for people, uh, and survivors, et cetera.
Um, and so we will be, um, uh, uh,
working with the multi agencies in terms of how they adapt
or, uh, how they take up the recommendations.
But we can only influence, we can't force them to do.
I agree. But are you doing any sort of future work to kind
of following the recommendations to track where those are at
and to publish that at all?
Like, 'cause otherwise these recommendations just go into a
void and I just wanna check.
And we have done that with some of our
other mortality review reports.
We've done subsequent reports.
I have to say though, it's pretty depressing putting another
report some years later that just
shows all the things that haven't happened.
I'm not saying that's a reason not to do it,
but yeah, it's just a common, um,
but it's something we're looking at.
Yes, yes. The answer is yes, we're looking
At it. Okay. When,
when you say thank you,
when you say you're working with other
agencies, what does that look like?
Uh, so there is an established mechanism of,
of government, uh,
or of government on the focus on the
issues of family violence.
So it means uh, it, it, well, we've done a number
of presentations, uh, to, uh, that grouping
about the report and its findings, uh,
and working with them about
what specific recommendations might look like.
So do you work with them on their own performance
evaluation, um, metrics
to see if you can influence embedding some
of your recommendations into how they measure themselves?
Depends on what you're talking about.
Are you still, are we still talking about the femicide and
Yes. An example.
Um, some of the experts involved in the work
that we do work with them, don't. Is that the answer?
Yes. Yes. So that would be a good outcome to see some
of your recommendations end up in their ev own
evaluation frameworks?
Absolutely. How often does that happen?
I couldn't say. Yeah,
We have to, It does happen.
That's good. We, we've looked previously at,
at recommendations that work and don't work.
Um, those that are quite specific, uh,
for a particular agency or a particular actor.
Uh, and if it aligns with current government policy,
there's a number of factors which we can identify,
would say a recommendation has a fair chance of sticking.
Uh, and there's also, there's, uh, the,
the inverse of that as well.
We know when recommendations, uh, don't,
when there's not alignment or where it's too general
or where there's no, it's not specific enough.
And so in this case, uh, that report identified a number
of quite specific issues, some of them relation relating
to data, some of them relating to intersection
between family violence
and other issues we've discussed today, such as suicide, um,
uh, and, um, mortality, uh, other mortality.
Um, and so, uh, that's, those sort
of quite specific recommendations, uh, are more likely
to be taken up by agencies taking a broader view of
where they might seeing the evidence around family violence.
Thank you very much. That's very helpful.
Thank you. We have, uh, two minutes left.
So primary, Jenny Markoff.
Thank you. We've been talking about mortality quite a bit,
so I want to continue that theme.
In terms of palliative care, um, we know that, uh,
currently at the moment there's no specialist palliative
care in the far north, uh, in hospitals.
So, um, is that a piece of work
and obviously aging population, more people are,
are requiring palliative services.
Is this a, is this something you were looking at
or if you could speak to that all please.
So, um, Ray referred earlier to the work that,
that's coming up very soon in the new year on our new SOI
and I'm sorry, on our new statement of intent,
Right? Yep.
And so one of the things, one
of the lenses I guess we'll be applying to
that is the aging population
and what we need to look at newly and
or differently in relation to that.
And palliative care can be, is part of that.
And palliative care obviously is a very broad, um,
encompassing, quite broadly encompassing phrase.
So, um, it's not specific to aged care.
Um, so I'm not sure you asking.
Yeah. Is there more you want to ask?
So more, I'm more specifically you want to ask.
So I'm, I'm asking is that going to be a area
of focus for your work?
Yes, we do have an aging population.
More people are requiring palliative care care services.
Okay. There's less funding available for things, uh,
organizations like hospice.
But also we've seen that there is, um, a a lack
of specialists and child palliative.
So is this an area that you're gonna be focusing on
and when can we hear from you on that in more detail?
So I would say these, this is is the sort of thing
that will be considered in the work
that we're doing on the statement of intent,
because I can't preempt the, the board when we
Look at, you know, among the multitude
of things we could prioritize as a small entity.
Um, these are things that will be in the mix in terms
of the next few years.
Work and focus. Um, I mean this, the, the, the,
the sad thing is that we can't do everything.
So we do have to work out which of the bits
where we can make have the greatest impact.
I'm not saying that's not one of them,
it's one that we need to consider.
Um, and certainly we need to be very aware, I think
of the changing demands on the system with this, you know,
big cohort of some of us going through
and all gonna hit 80 at
around the same time in a few years. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Hey, thank you very much
for making stuff available for an hour today.
It's great. Appreciate it. You have a good day.
Thank you team. We are suspended until.